Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen
and welcome to the session Tuning
for Velocity Engine and MP.
I'm Glenn Fisher.
I run the performance marketing
group in worldwide product
marketing at Apple Computer and
as such have been involved with
Velocity Engine and MP technologies
for the last several years.
Delighted to have all of you here today.
We have a great crew of presenters
from MetaWorks and would like to
thank them for the work they've done
in preparing this session and also
Chris Cox from Adobe who has been
instrumental in helping us with some
of the demos that you'll see today.
So, why are we here?
Two key technologies for Apple going
forward are Velocity Engine and MP.
The processor technologies that
we've been developing make those
technologies available to our
customers or will in the future,
and we need to make sure that you're
on board supporting those technologies
to get the best performance out of
your application and to take advantage
of the performance that's there
in the machine for our customers.
At the same time,
we recognize that it isn't always easy
to take advantage of these technologies,
so we're looking for ways to
make it as easy as possible,
and have been working closely with
Motorola and Metaworks over the
last few years to make it as easy as
possible for you to take advantage
of these powerful technologies.
For our information,
how many of you have actually written
Velocity Engine code or AltaVec code?
How many of you have
played around with it?
A few more, okay.
And how many of you are here
to find out how to get started?
Great, so that's wonderful to have
new recruits to the crowd.
So what we're covering today,
how to debug Velocity Engine applications
using MetroWorks CodeWire,
and we'll give you some specific
examples of tuning code for Velocity
Engine using MetroWorks CodeWire.
We'll also give you a brief
introduction to CodeWire support
for MP coding and debugging.
And to do that,
I'd like to bring up Bob Campbell,
who's the lead compiler
engineer at MetroWorks.
Bob?
I have to admit that I don't actually
write a lot of AlteVet code and
that's one of the reasons why we're
very grateful to Chris Cox for
providing us one of his examples.
I look at a lot of AlteVet code but
my tendency is to critique other
people's and not actually write it.
Along that line,
Changing from scalar code to vector
code requires that you put some
thought into what you're doing.
And standard things that apply to scalar
code still apply to Velocity Engine.
So you should profile your code.
You should make sure that if you're
going to make something run faster,
make something that you're actually
spending time doing run faster.
So find your hot spots and look at them
and think about ways to rewrite them.
Another issue for Altevec is
that alignment is important.
The engine will run much faster
if you have 16 byte aligned data.
Then it will run if you've
got things misaligned,
then you're going to have to
waste cycles realigning them.
Another thing is
Because you're going to work
on things in big chunks of 4,
8, or 16 elements,
you can't really have an if
statement that does something
different on one element that you're
going to do on the other element.
So you need to take advantage of
instructions like vSelect that allow you
to basically do conditional assignments
within straight line code with no ifs.
And probably a third point is that one
of the most powerful features of AlteVec
is the data streaming instructions.
So if you're writing code that's
going ripping through memory,
then you ought to tell the CPU, hey,
I'm going to be going ripping
through memory and I'm going
to be reading every so often.
Tell it how much you're going to
be reading and what your stride is.
That way it will read the data into
the cache before you even get there.
As the example that we have that
we're going to show you today,
you can almost plan on
restructuring your code.
Algorithms that work well scalarly
may be significantly different
than the algorithms that you're
going to work on in vectors.
The example that we have from
Chris Cox is a rotate example,
and the rotate example
was interesting because
You change the way you move through your
data in order to enable you to speed up.
And we'll actually talk about
that when we run the example.
Another point about AlteVec is that
You know, you see this great instruction
and it'll do some across.
It'll let you add four values
together and produce a result.
You can't just go stick that in every
time you need to do that one instruction.
You need to be doing more than just
using one vector instruction because
there's setup overhead and you won't
get back your setup overhead if
you're only running one instruction.
So it's not a good idea to write a
bunch of little tiny functions that
call one single AlteVec function.
And kind of in that point one of the
things that we've discovered is that
There's some bookkeeping regarding
saving Altevec registers.
So one of the comments has been,
if you're going to do a
bunch of Altevec code,
there's a pragma you stick in
at the beginning that says,
I'm going to be using Altevec code.
Generate all your code with
all the function calls,
and then turn it off at the end.
That saves some of the
intermediate bookkeeping
regarding saving the registers,
because it sort of like sets it up at the
beginning and cleans it up at the end.
And last is, you need to look for
parallelism in your algorithms.
Places where you can do
four things at a time,
or eight things at a time,
instead of looking for sort of
iterating through one at a time.
At that point,
I want to bring up Richard Atwell,
and we're going to run through a
demo of some Rotate code from Adobe.
Oops.
And I'm in charge of the monitors, so...
So here basically Richard has
launched the program in the debugger.
Are we at the beginning here?
Yeah, we're at the beginning.
You want to run to the first breakpoint.
The part that's interesting is
the original rotate algorithm
just went through rows at a time,
writing out columns at a time.
So it's a 90 degree rotate,
so if you're going along like this
and you're writing down like this.
Can you make the font bigger, Richard?
The change to do for the Altevec
algorithm is instead of to think
about working in rows and columns,
is to take the input
and break it into tiles,
where the tiles exactly fit
basically 16 byte by 16 byte square.
So what we're going to do is we're
going to load a 16 byte by 16 byte
square into Altevec registers,
rotate it in the registers,
and then write it back out where it goes.
So instead of going along word at a time,
we're going to grab a chunk,
we're going to rotate it,
and we're going to write it back out.
So actually Richard is here at the
function which is going to do this.
I'm not really sure how in-depth we
want to go into the instructions,
but it essentially does.
You want to step through it?
Oh, we were going to show off
-- Richard wants to show
off some debugger features.
These are what he works on.
So we've got a nice register window.
You can look at all
the Altevec registers.
You can step through code.
You can watch the
registers as they change,
as it loads them.
So basically at this point he's going
to do one more step and it's going
to have like basically loaded all
loaded this whole tile into memory and
I'm sitting here looking at Chris going,
you should explain this stuff.
But it's actually a pretty neat
algorithm because instead of
doing what I would have done,
which is individually move the
elements within the vectors
around to the right spots,
he used a trick with the merge
instruction to sort of merge part way
and then a second merge which puts
everything exactly where it wants to go.
And if you really want to know,
are we going to make this code available?
Okay, so we won't promise that yet.
But it's a pretty nice thinking
about the problem differently and
looking at what AlteVet can do.
And instead of saying, you know,
move my elements individually,
I move half my elements
halfway where I want them.
And then the second set of merge
instructions moves them the other half.
Richard, going down to the merges,
is the entire rotate is...
So basically that set of eight
instructions causes everything to rotate.
And I think Richard wanted to
show a few debugger features.
Can you hear me now?
OK.
So one of the problems that we had
was how to represent the vector
registers because they're so large.
So what we decided to do is make
use of the struct paradigm that we
already have in the variable view.
And you can take a look at all
of the scalar elements that
live within the vector elements.
And you can modify these
things individually in order to
help you with your debugging.
So because we had the ability to do that,
we also wondered what we
can do for breakpoints.
And we have a conditional
breakpoint feature in the IDE,
but because of the way Motorola specified
the structs as being anonymous,
you couldn't access the elements inside.
We had to invent some syntax for
you to get inside those things.
So if you look down the
breakpoints window here,
we have a conditional breakpoint
and we're going to set a breakpoint
Line 32, and it's going to be on
the source one variable.
If you take a look at the syntax,
it's SRC1 dot followed by what
looks like an array notation.
This is just something that we
borrowed because we're using this
array-like notation to indicate the
scalar elements inside each vector.
So what we can do is we can
change the PC and move it up here.
If I go run,
it's going to hit the breakpoint.
If I change it back again,
and change the condition,
it should bypass the breakpoint,
as it did.
Any other debugger features?
The Vector Register window is so huge.
So we made it scrollable.
and if you're small on real estate
on your PowerBook or whatever,
we don't have G4 PowerBook yet,
but when we do,
you'll be able to grow the window and
expect register values and then shrink
it back down and it remembers the
position you had it scroll to before
so you can kind of manage the debugging
a bit better and not let the debugger
get in the way of your programming.
Okay, so could we quit the debugger
and run the non-debug version?
Sure.
I want to show,
because basically Chris was kind enough
to set us up with an example that
runs the scalar code several different
ways and then runs the AlteVec code.
So if we could just run that,
and of course it's going to build it.
The scalar code was what
I was talking about earlier,
where it goes through memory by row,
writing out columns.
Then an additional one that
was tried to do it the other
way was writing out by rows,
but reading by columns,
sort of inverting the way you do it
to kind of look at the differences
in the way it walks through memory.
So then, you know,
and I can't hardly read that.
No, it's not your fault.
It's our terminal window.
The first attempt up there took, what,
4.3 seconds.
The second attempt took 5.3, 5.2,
and the third one was...
5.1.
Those were all scalar attempts
of different ways of doing it.
And the one thing I like about
this is the fact that Chris very
religiously has a base case,
he writes a new case,
he keeps the base case,
and he always keeps comparing
the times to make sure that
we're actually getting better.
The fourth case is the vector case,
which is the one that we
stepped through in the debugger.
And that one took,
what does it say there, Richard?
2.7.
2.7 seconds?
So not quite half, but the third one,
which is actually the interesting one,
was where he combines all the features.
He added in the data
stream touch instruction,
where he sort of tells the CPU which
memory he's going to read ahead.
And that one runs at 1.6, which is,
what did we get to?
We got better than half, right?
Almost a quarter.
Yeah,
so it kind of shows you that there's
two parts to the Velocity Engine.
One part is the vector unit,
but to get full performance out of it,
especially for data streaming operations,
you really need to take advantage of
the cache hints and starting to tell it
what you're going to read ahead of time.
[Transcript missing]
There.
So it's basically the
DataStream touch instruction.
It takes the pointer.
It takes a cache pattern.
You need to read through
the manual a little bit.
And what's the one?
The one in the end, the last parameter.
Oh, that's right.
This is stream one.
I should know this.
So anyway,
that's what I was going to talk about.
I was actually going
to save stuff for Q&A.
And I want to bring up--
push the right button,
push the right thing.
Bring up Ken,
who's gonna talk about MP debugging.
Thanks Bob.
We've been doing a lot of work
with the IDE in the debugger,
trying to carbonize it and get
the tools ready for the Pro6
Beta CD that we've got here.
But we've also kept Richard really busy
working on other Apple technologies,
too.
All of the Altevec
debugging support you saw,
and then also support for the
newer flavors of the MP debugging,
or MP APIs.
And we had some MP support
in the debugger before,
but Richard's really revved it and
made it work with the newer APIs.
There's a new MetroNav
extension and newer plug-in,
and some new user interfaces done, too.
Let's see, we've already seen some
of this in the demo,
but just to recap,
there's the vector register
window for AltaVec.
You saw how vector registers
and variables can be shown as
structs for easy viewing of those.
And then the work we've done to support
that and the expression parser and
also for conditional breakpoints.
For MP, we already had sort of a
paradigm of having separate
thread windows in the debugger.
You can also view all the threads
in one window with a pop-up menu if
you want to look at them that way.
And so we just use the
same paradigm for MP tasks.
We also list the MP tasks along
with the cooperative threads
inside the processes window.
So you can look at specific processes
and see exactly which MP tasks and
which cooperative threads they have.
And then we've also tweaked the registers
window interface a bit so that you
can look at registers for separate
MP tasks in separate register windows.
And so now we'll go back to
Richard for a demo of some of
the things I just talked about.
There we go.
OK.
So if you were in the session this
morning on Mac OS 9 and multitasking--
George Warner was up on stage
and he showed you this little
demo called Close View.
and Bob Campbell.
MP 1.4 API.
We've decided to jettison
support for it too.
So we've combined the extensions together
so there's only one Metronub extension
for debugging so you don't have to
swap this thing out to do MP stuff.
And it makes it a lot easier.
So I'm going to debug this thing.
So the program starts up and
the first thing I want to show
you is the preferences in the
So we can see CloseView MP under
control of the debugger here.
We've got the main thread,
which is a cooperative thread,
and it's suspended.
And I'm just going to step
through into the code to the
point where we're just about to
create the MP task to do the work.
So can anyone read the text OK?
OK, so I'll make it a bit bigger.
Here we go.
So what we're going to do is we're
going to step over this line,
and it's going to create an MP task.
And MP tasks are created
in the runnable state.
and in the main blit routine that's
going to draw into that window,
I've got a breakpoint set.
So what should happen is
I should step over this thing,
we're going to get another thread window
and we're going to hit the breakpoint.
So here we go.
So let me just resize the window
here because we've got a little bug.
So under the control of
the Code Warrior Debugger,
we have the cooperative task
that was drawing the interface,
and we also have control of the MP task.
So these things are running completely
independently of each other.
So what I can do is I can
step in the main task.
and go back to the MP task and
I can step independently of the two.
Let's get the main task running again.
We've stopped at wait next event,
so I'm going to take the break point off,
hit run.
So we've got the program
running back here again,
except what's happening is we've got
the break point still in the MP task,
so we're not getting
any drawing happening.
But the cooperative task is free to run,
and that's what's drawing the window
and letting us drag it around.
So I'm going to go back
to the window here.
and Bob Campbell.
So, I'm going to move this around a
bit so you can see in the corner.
So, the Blitter is running in a loop,
so I'm going to set the
Code Warrior debugger,
stopping every time it
hits the breakpoint.
And you notice that the way this
thing works is it updates the
display underneath the mouse.
So, as I move the mouse around,
hitting resume,
we're going to get the display updating.
So let's go back to the processes window.
So we can see that we've got a few tasks.
We've got the cooperative task.
We've got our MP task,
which reads as stopped.
And the task above it is
called the death watch task.
It's something that the OS creates,
and it tears down all the MP tasks
when the application exits.
So let's go back to the
breakpoints window here.
And let's temporarily
disable the breakpoint.
Get the MP task running again.
And that's updating.
Let's set the breakpoint again.
Next time we blip, we stop.
So basically we've got MP 2.0
support for debugging the code order.
and that's it.
Thanks Richard.
And that's in Beta 6 right now?
Richard Wolitski: Mostly.
This stuff is a little bit newer and
it's going to be finished up next
week and then put up for download.
Yeah,
so if you get the Beta 6 tool CD that
we have here at WWDC and then just
check our website in about a week
and you can get the same stuff
that Richard's been demoing here.
We'll have them outside the
door after this session is over.
I'm sorry?
We have the same architecture
for showing multiple threads,
whether it's Java or MP.
But it's up to Metronub
to actually figure out,
you know, what the threads are doing.
Okay, that's it for our MP demo.
So now here's Godfrey.
Howdy.
I want to thank our MetroWorks friends
for coming and showing us this stuff.
We left a lot of time for Q&A today
so that we could field your
questions and just run it kind
of informally from that point.
So without further ado,
we have three mics set up.
People should queue up at the mics.
And a little roadmap of some
more sessions this afternoon.
We have Apple's performance
tools for Mac OS X,
and tomorrow we'll have a debugging
session in the main hall at 9 a.m.
We have people queuing up.
Could all of our presenters
please step up to the stage?